

Unit-IV 
Topic 5:  Segmentation 
Like  Paging,  Segmentation  is  another  non-contiguous  memory  allocation technique. In Paging, the 
process was divided into equal-sized pages irrespective of the fact that what is inside the pages. It also 
divides some relative parts of a process into different pages which should be loaded on the same 
page. It decreases the efficiency of the system and doesn't give the user's view of a process. In 
Segmentation, similar modules are loaded in the same segments. It gives the user's view of a process 
and also increases the efficiency of the system as compared to Paging. 
 
Basic Method 
A Program is basically a collection of segments. And a segment is a logical unit such as: main program, 
procedure, function, method, object, local variable and global variables, symbol table, common block, 
stack and arrays. A computer system that is using segmentation has a logical address space that can 
be viewed as multiple segments. 
 
 
And the size of the segment is of the variable that is it may grow or shrink. As we had already told you 
that during the execution each segment has a name and length. And the address mainly specifies both 
thing name of the segment and the displacement within the segment. Therefore the user specifies each 
address  with  the  help  of  two  quantities:  segment  name  and  offset.For  simplified  Implementation 
segments  are  numbered;  thus  referred  to  as  segment  number  rather  than  segment  name.Thus  the 
logical address consists of two tuples:<segment-number,offset> where, 

Segment Number(s): 
Segment Number is used to represent the number of bits that are required to represent the 
segment. 
Offset(d) 
Segment offset is used to represent the number of bits that are required to represent the 
size of the segment. 
 
Hardware 
 The details about each segment are stored in a table called a segment table. Segment table is stored 
in one (or many) of the segments.In the segment table each entry has : 
Segment Base/base address: 
The segment base mainly contains the starting physical address where the segments reside in the 
memory. 
Segment Limit: 
The segment limit is mainly used to specify the length of the segment. 
 
Let's take the example of segmentation to understand how it works. 
Let us assume we have five segments namely: Segment-0, Segment-1, Segment-2, Segment-3, and 
Segment-4. Initially, before the execution of the process, all the segments of the process are stored 
in the physical memory space. We have a segment table as well. The segment table contains the 
beginning entry address of each segment (denoted by base). The segment table also contains the 
length of each of the segments (denoted by limit). 
As shown in the image below, the base address of Segment-0 is 1400 and its length is 1000, the base 
address of Segment-1 is 6300 and its length is 400, the base address of Segment-2 is 4300 and its 
length is 400, and so on.The pictorial representation of the above segmentation with its segment 
table is shown below. 

 
 
With the help of segment table and hardware assistance, the operating system can easily translate a 
logical address into physical address on execution of a program. The Segment number is mapped to 
the segment table. The limit of the respective segment is compared with the offset. If the offset is less 
than the limit then the address is valid otherwise it throws an error as the address is invalid. In the case 
of valid addresses, the base address of the segment is added to the offset to get the physical address 
of the actual word in the main memory. 
 
 
 
 

Advantages of Segmentation 
1. No internal fragmentation 
2. Average Segment Size is larger than the actual page size. 
3. Less overhead 
4. It is easier to relocate segments than entire address space. 
5. The segment table is of lesser size as compared to the page table in paging. 
Disadvantages 
1. It can have external fragmentation. 
2. it is difficult to allocate contiguous memory to variable sized partition. 
3. Costly memory management algorithms. 
 
Paging Vs Segmentation 
Paging Segmentation 
A page is a physical unit of information. A segment is a logical unit of information. 
Frames on main memory are required No frames are required 
The page is of the fixed block size The page is of the variable block size 
It leads to internal fragmentation It leads to external fragmentation 
The page size is decided by hardware in paging Segment size is decided by the user in segmentation 
It does not allow logical partitioning and 
protection of application components 
It allows logical partitioning and protection of 
application components 
Paging involves a page table that contains the 
base address of each page 
Segmentation involves the segment table that 
contains the segment number and offset 
 